Gary Schwartz has all the right credentials.
He received his doctorate from Harvard,
taught psychiatry and psychology at Yale,
and is currently a professor of get this,
psychology, medicine, neurology,
psychiatry, and surgery at the University of Arizona.
Fortunately for everyone who has ever wanted
to communicate with a deceased loved one,
Dr. Schwartz is drawing on all of his knowlege
in the research of afterlife communications.
In spite of the historic giggle factor
by colleagues and the media.
Gary, where did this journey begin
with such a prestigious background with prestigious
institutions, how did you end up
in the area of studying life beyond life?
It began in two areas.
One was scientific and one was personal.
The scientific side was that when I was a professor
at Yale, and I was
studying the nature of light
I began to realize that light has a kind
of immortality.
We look up at the sky at night
we can see thousands or millions
of stars, and with telescopes of course
we can see thousands and millions of galaxies,
and what physics tells us that the light
from these distance stars emanates out into space,
and long after the star has quote died
that light continues.
When we're looking at the sky at night
we're seeing a history of the starlight,
and the amazing thing about the universe
is that starlight doesn't lose it's information.
It doesn't lose it's individuality.
If that light was getting all mixed and all blurred
and following what's called the second law of
thermodynamics.
We look up to the sky at night and we
see mush, and we'd have no astro physics.
Instead, in the quote vacuum of space,
the energy and information is preserved,
and what physics tells us is that
we're no different from the light from distant stars.
Our bodies and matter is organized energy.
We're both reflecting and emitting
not just visible light, but invisible light.
All of this going off into space,
and so what I began to realize was that
to the extent that we are energy and information,
and it continues, and then potentially
our consciousness and love could continue
like the life in distant stars.
That's the scientific side,
but it's one thing to be open scientifically,
it's another thing to actually do research
in the area, and there's where it gets personal.
I met a woman, Dr. Linda Russic whose father,
Dr. Henry Russic had been a distinguished cardiologist
and scientist, and when he died
Linda went on a scientific and metaphysical quest
to discover whether her father was still here,
or I met Susie Smith.
When I met her she was 83 years old.
She has published 29 books in the field
of para psychology and survival of conscious
after death.
In her mid 40s her mother died,
and then she went on a quest
to see whether she could find whether
her mother was still here.
The bottom line is that I was pushed there
by theory and research,
but I was pulled there by love,
by Linda's lover for her father,
by Susie's love for her mother,
and other people that I met a long the way,
and when you're pushed and pulled
in the same direction it gets very hard
to resist.
That's really how I started.
It wasn't like I had a grand plan to
do this kind of work, or that I was
personally interested in the work.
It was a set of circumstances that led me
to get involved.
And this could not have been easy,
because you were subject to peer pressure
and ridicule going into an area that
has historically been
basically treated in a very derisive way.
Absolutely.
In fact I knew that if I got involved
in this research that a number of my
colleagues would be very unhappy.
In fact as I affectionately tell people,
at this point some of my colleagues
would prefer that I do this work
somewhere else, preferably on another planet.
I was very well aware at the beginning that
if I was gonna go this, I was gonna do
it very quietly, especially God forbid,
we got positive results,
which of course we continued to do,
and it has now become very visible.
Not only very quietly, but very thoroughly
it sounds like,
Can you tell us a little bit about how the
more documented aspect of this began taking shape
through your contacts through the university etcetera.
Yes,
this was a program really in evolution.
I'm trained as a mainstream scientist,
so I apply the methods of science,
and I approach it from sort of a skeptical
certainly agnostic if not skeptical
perspective, and so consequently, if you're gonna do
research in the area, you have to control for
a whole host of things,
including the possibility of fraud,
the possibility of what's called cold reading
which are techniques that mental magicians use.
By the way, I've actually taken classes in how to be
a fake medium, and I'm pretty good at it.
I know what cheating involves.
You have to address the question of whether
the people who are the sitters,
the people who wanna hear from their loved ones.
To what extent they're bias in grabbing
for information or accepting information.
That really doesn't apply to them.
You have to be sensitive to possible experimenter
errors or experimenter biases
all these things you have to take into account
if you're gonna address whether mediums are for real,
and we were very sensitive to that right from the beginning
and I began working with one research medium,
one by the name of Laurie Campbell,
doing research in secret,
and we did what are called single blind
and even double blind experiments
where the medium didn't know who the sitter
was, the medium couldn't even talk to the sitter
so that you got no information.
Also the sitter wasn't present or the rater
wasn't present at the time
that the reading was taking place.
Before you go any further, please explain
who the sitter is.
A sitter would be someone who lost a daughter
or son, or had a spouse who died
or a parent who died,
and wished to hear from their deceased love one,
and in our case they're research sitters,
because they're participating in research.
We began with one medium,
and much to my amazement we continued to
get positive results, ruling out these things
like fraud, cold reading, and then rater bias
and experimenter error,
then through the good fortune of Lisa Jackson
doing a documentary called Life After Life
for HBO special in 1998.
She was in contact with multiple mediums
including John Edward and George Anderson
and Suzanne Northrup and Gamein
and others and she was interested in the idea
of science addressing this question.
We had the scientific methods and the expertise.
She had the access to the mediums and the funding.
We put our efforts together,
and we did the first ever controlled
multi-medium, multi-sitter experiment
which was actually video taped as a real experiment,
and then ultimately shown on this special Life After Life,
and that enabled me to then develop
a solid working relationship with John Edward for example,
and he participated in three experiments in the laboratory
before he became famous, before he had his
television show, and once the work became public
then other mediums started hearing about this.
The way we discover medium is that they
would come to us,
and the second wave of mediums included
a woman by the name of Janet Mayer,
and also a young woman by the name of Allison
Dubai, and Allison is a
participated in the lab for four years,
and based on her remarkable experience
as a medium coupled with her research
in the laboratory, a television program
was ultimately made inspired by her life
which is called Medium,
which is now on NBC.
There's a book coming out this Fall that I wrote
with my writing partner called the truth about medium
which describes four years of research with
the real Allison Dubois, and other mediums
in this wave two group
that reveal some of the remarkable things,
the surprising things
that they can do, and so the work just continues.
We're now in wave three of mediums,
our next generation of mediums,
and it's quite a privilege.
Along the way you did more media.
You had at one point I understand,
if I recall, was it around 1999 you had a special
on HBO where again they taped
mediums and sitters live,
and then over a period of months
chronicled the results, that was very specifically designed
to be results oriented.
Yes, and also arts and entertainment
did a special Beyond Death that we
did demonstration research for,
and I would say every year there have been
at least two or three different
either small segments or larger segments
of programs that have addressed this research.
The public is very interested in this.
It is interesting.
The public is very interested in it,
and just to touch on this for a moment,
when I read your book, the startling
statistic was that the mediums
were an average of 83% correct as compared to a control
group of non-mediums who were utilized
to basically try to intuit guess, whatever
under the same conditions
Right.
And so we're looking at a stark difference
yet the media in the past it seems
has not particularly treated it
entirely fairly or throughly.
Yes.
Until very recently
the media has been for the most part
downright hostile to this work,
and there have been actual cases of
deception used by people in the media
in order to cast it in a negative light
when in fact it was positive.
I tell a story in the book
with a Fox television show where I called
it Double Deception.
In this case it was led by a skeptic,
Michael Shermer
and how they carefully edited it
to make it look like it was a sham,
when in fact they were selectively ignoring
all the positive stuff to make it look like it
was negative.
The metaphor is like, let's say that you
wanna know whether Michael Jordan
can really play basketball,
but you're a skeptic, and what you wanna do
is you wanna prove, well make it appear
that not only is there no such thing as basketball,
but Michael can't play this ridiculous game.
What you do is you show a few of his air balls,
and then you show him do a foul or two.
You ignore all the shots that he gets,
and you ignore all the dazzle shots.
You can make him look like an idiot
by the selective emphasis on the negative
and ignoring the positive, and yet we all know
that he was one of the all time great
basketball players.
It's the same thing for Michael Jordans in the medium
world.
That did happen
It happened with Dateline.
It happened with a number of
unfortunate programs.
That seems to be changing.
It seems like the media has now had
enough exposure to
certainly mediums that have been on multiple
television programs including Larry King,
and so on, but also they've had enough exposure now
that the beginnings of the research
where it appears in People magazine
or TV Guide or wherever the Kings may be
so that now they're more open.
Safer to cover it.
It is safer to cover it, exactly.
They still feel the need to quote balance it,
and what balance means is.
You have the mediums claim what they do.
You have the scientists report the results which
for the most part are extraordinarily positive.
Then you have some skeptic come on
whose a paid professional skeptic
who makes his reputation by debunking,
and he says, oh it's all fraud,
or he says, well you can't trust the scientists,
and what they do is they present all of this
in a quote balanced way as if somehow
these comments by these professional skeptics
have any credibility.
We have to go get past the quote
giving a balanced representation
to actually following what the data really are,
and allowing the conclusions
that are justified
to be spoken.
I will second that as a news anchor.
That was our charge to always make everything
have the appearance of balance.
That's a very different thing
than actually having balanced reporting.
Very seldom was it actually balanced.
You just had to dig up anybody who would
take a counter viewpoint, whether they've read the
study or not,
Exactly.
And then suddenly it's balanced.
I know what you're up against.
I will never forget when Dateline
came out to do this special,
and I told them that I was willing to actually
show them the raw data of multiple experiments
and they could watch it on television,
but what I wanted was them to promise
that the skeptic would actually see the data
before he made his comments.
They promised.
They come out, and they come into the lab,
and they set up all the lighting.
The announcer and interviewer is there,
and so on, and
he was very skeptical.
The data spoke for itself,
and they were all done.
I said are you going off to the
skeptic?
And they said oh, no we filmed him yesterday
in New York.
I said wait a second.
If you filmed him yesterday, he hasn't seen
these results, so how can he comment?
She said, well you know we were busy,
and we just had to fit it into our schedule.
The way they showed it on television was
they start off for example with John in his life.
Then they interview me showing the research,
John and other mediums doing what they're doing.
Then they take a break,
and then they feed in the skeptic as if the
skeptic had any knowledge of the real data
and what was being said, and so of course
they gave a false impression.
That's unfortunate, and I don't think
the public should stand for that.
The good thing is as you say,
it's changing and it's changing because
the public is now demanding that it change,
because in essence the media is only a response
to what it is we desire in the end,
what we're willing to put up with,
and that means the public wants the real skinny now.
(laugher)
I applaud the public for wanting to hear the truth
at least about this matter.
Hopefully other matters as well.
I would like to ask you questions having
to do very specifically with this,
because your book really goes on to
cover a lot more than just these experiments.
You have a great amount of depth,
a great amount of curiosity,
and it's admirable that all of the areas in which
you've already explored and are able to speak
so eloquently, and one of them has to do
with the subject of the essential
vibration as it were of love and how that
feeds into the ability to communicate
to what's beyond, and to past transition
shall we say.
Can you speak a little bit about
what you think is actually happening
when you have a sitter, a medium,
and then the one that medium is connecting
with or the ones?
If we accept over eight years of research,
and we're willing to accept the fact that these
particular meetings are not engaged in fraud
and any of that, that this is real genuine information
that they're getting quote anonymously,
and also that the medium is not
reading the mind of the sitter.
She's not just simply giving you what you wanna hear
by reading your mind or even reading your unconscious,
and she's not also just reading
quote dead information in space, but that really
there's a living conscious intentional presence
of a deceased person.
We call this quote discarnate intention,
that's the scientific term for this.
If we accept this for the moment,
then the question is how does it work?
First of all the bottom line in all of this
from our research and also from theory
is the bottom line is love,
and people often ask me, they say
well gee,
why are these people hanging around?
Why do they wanna talk,
and why are they saying such often quote
mundane things?
And my explanation is simple.
This is what comes through over and over again.
The number one bond that we have
in the physical is love, and love is the most
powerful, and the most enduring of
emotions and motivators for relationship,
and people who experience love, with their children,
with their spouses, with their parents, with their friends.
If they experience love with music
or with art or with science
or with knowledge or with sports or whatever
the more genuine love they can have in their lives
the more meaningful their lives are,
and of course there's no replacement for human relationship,
and just because one person loses their
physical body doesn't mean that they lose their caring.
That doesn't mean that they lose their
desire to be with the people that they love the most.
It's really no different between wanting to see someone
if you're in the physical and wanting to see someone
if they're not in the physical,
and this motivation continues
to serve as core connection,
and that bond that can not just even maintained
or sustained.
It can even be developed to the extent of the person
and the physical is open, and the person
who has transitioned equally cares as well.
Love becomes the ultimate energy, the ultimate force
behind this, and imagine for the moment
that you're deceased, and you are
your mother and daughter whose in her 20s
has been waiting for months to see a medium.
Just because you've died, let's imagine
that you're still with your daughter.
You still over see your daughter.
You care, but she doesn't hear you.
She can't see you,
but the medium can, and you know your daughter
has this scheduled, because you tend to be around her.
When that half hour or hour
of time arrives where you can actually communicate through
the medium, what are you gonna do?
The first thing you're gonna do is you're gonna
identify yourself.
You're gonna wanna show what you look like.
You're gonna wanna be able to give
your name, provide you with your hair,
give details about for example how you died.
Give just enough information so your daughter
knows it's you, and that's
one kind of thing you typically see
as identifying information.
The second thing is you want your daughter
to know that you're still here.
You'll recount something that happened
in the past, a frame that fell down or
a wedding that just occurred,
or a pregnancy that's about to happen
or whatever, so you'll give this information
about what's happened in the immediate past,
and what's gonna happen
in the future, and the third thing you're
gonna do is you're gonna share
your love and your caring
and your advice and maybe even asking for forgiveness
about some event.
You're gonna share that information,
because you love this person.
Are you gonna be talking about
the latest movie or experience you
had on pilates or some event
on the other side that your daughters not
gonna even know if it's you.
She's not gonna have a way of verifying.
Are you gonna be giving some great insight
about the world?
Of course not.
They had a 15 year old daughter, Bailey
who died unexpectedly in a car crash
not far from their home.
Their son almost died.
There is no greater pain or loss than losing
a child that you dearly love,
particularly if it's sudden.
Bob was a skeptic like me.
He was raised to believe it was ashes to ashes,
dust to dust, case closed.
Fran was a little bit more open.
They were deeply grieving,
and they discovered the afterlife experiments book,
and after they read this, they began to have some hope,
and they wanted to see whether
they could replicate in their own lives.
They started going to mediums.
They started scoring information.
They even went to people like Laurie Campbell
and other mediums that were in the book,
and after with their own experience they could
independently verify the reality of this
under the kinds of circumstances,
and they came to me.
They wanted to participate in research,
and they came to realize that what they
were experiencing with real information
it didn't eliminate the pain of missing their daughter,
but what it did is it gave them a sense of peace.
It gave them a sense of hope.
It gave them a sense of purpose.
They then became open to receiving signs
from their daughters and so on,
and they, in her honor, created the Forever Family
foundation so that other families
could have the opportunity if they wished
to be able to learn about the science,
to actually experience and share
afterlife communications
with the goal of allowing these relationships
to continue, and we're just actually
finishing a book called Forever Family Calling,
Transforming Grief Through Afterlife Science,
and I think of all of the various incentives
that I have for continuing this work,
helping families who are grieving the loss
of their loved ones, is a very important
component.
Speaking of that very subject, one of the other
people that we have interviewed is Mark Cummings whom
I have a tremendous amount of respect for
as a mathematician, physicist, and a mystic in his
own right, brilliant man,
and his wife, Elizabeth Targ
of the fame Dr. Russel Targ, his daughter
passed away.
It's been almost a couple of years ago now
from a brain tumor.
It's my understanding that,
I don't know if it's one or multiple mediums
have had contact with Elizabeth,
and then another person whom I was familiar with
and also admired the work of, which is Dr. John Mack
of Harvard, head of Clinical Psychology
at Harvard who was hit by, wasn't it a taxi in
London last summer?
Yes.
It was a vehicle, that's correct.
Yes, he was there giving a presentation,
and I think it was August of 2004.
I'm also understanding that he is coming
through some of the mediums.
Can you talk about this a little bit?
Sure.
You knew Dr. Mack before.
Didn't you?
Yes, I had met John Mack
because we had been at a couple of conferences together.
The area that he was working in at the time,
what he was most famous for which was
UFOs and alien abductions.
It's not an area that I'm working,
but our Harvard connection and other things.
We came to know each other,
and then a year ago February,
sitting almost where I'm sitting, John came to see me
to tell me that he had become deeply interested
in the topic of survival of consciousness after death
and afterlife research, and that he was writing
a book with Mark Cummings about a biography
of Elizabeth Targ, and also the experiences that they've
been having with her through mediums after she died,
and he wanted to know
what the latest research was and did I think this was real?
We spent over five hours in conversation
in this very room, and I shared with John
that I had done some secret research
where Elizabeth Targ was one the deceased,
and that the research had come out
very positive, and that
I was deeply concerned for her and for Mark,
and that if there was any way that I could assist
in the completion of his book with Mark,
including even doing an independent
replication, double blind experiment
to give scientific credibility to his
more clinical observations that I was happy to do that,
and John wrote the proposal for his book.
He actually quoted me on the cover of his proposal
about the importance of his work,
and then he goes off to London and he's killed.
That was very sad.
Very.
Because of who he was and is,
and because of who Elizabeth was and is
they are unique individuals who from the other side
can not only inform us about
transition and afterlife and so on,
but because of who John is, we also
now have the potential to
discover the reality of the alien abduction
and UFO phenomena because of John's
deep interest in this,
and what was quite remarkable to me
was that after he passed multiple mediums
spontaneously called me, telling me that John
had come through and he had messages for me.
You said surely McClain did,
just very recently he had some
understanding that a John Mack was showing up
on her psychic doorstep.
John McClain was very close to John
because of their mutual interest in UFOs.
The irony is just a little over a week ago
CBS News was doing a documentary for
Art and Entertainment, a two hour special
on mediumship and they wanted to
include conversation with a scientist about the work
and also they wanted to see a demonstration experiment.
They flew out to Tuscan,
and I arranged for a medium, Debbie Martin from Phoenix,
and a secret sitter to come in for
the reading.
Debbie, like many mediums, will often
get information before the reading begins,
because she's open to receiving the information,
and imagine again, you're deceased.
You know Debbie is gonna be the medium,
because you're hanging around,
and you also know Debbie is willing to get information
before the reading begins.
You're gonna use as much as her time as you can get.
It's not surprising that she'll get this information.
Debbie comes in and their filming this,
and she's reading the first phase.
She can't see the sitter.
She can't speak to the sitter.
She's just reading into the camera what she got,
and toward the tail end before the actual
reading where the sitters gonna be.
She says, oh by the way Gary,
she says.
There were three people who came here for you,
and they just wanted their presence known.
One of them was Susie Smith,
and Susie has come up in multiple readings.
Of course I was not gonna go there.
The second was a person by the name
of Monteigue Keen and then she said,
man I don't know who he is.
His name is John, and he's an older
gentleman, sort of tall,
and he's standing up and he's sitting down,
and he's standing up and he's sitting down.
He really wants to be acknowledged.
He says you know who he is,
and that he just wanted you to know that he's here.
Of course I was not about to say anything
on this television program,
and it was not the context in which to explore
was this who I thought it was?
But it very much sounded like
was consistent with John Mack
who has been showing up with other research mediums
and given the fact that I was also gonna
be having a conversation with John McClain.
These things are really unfolding.
Of course, the scientist is gonna say,
well how do you know fraud is not involved?
How do you know the cold reading is not involved?
How do you know that you're
not just selectively looking at this information,
looking at the shots taking
it in and ignoring the misses and so on
and so forth,
and my response to that is
that is the bread and butter of what we do.
That is so fundamental that we do this
over and over.
That's where we start from.
You have to rule out all of that
before we rule in the survival.
83% accuracy isn't a fluke either, is it?
83% accuracy is not at all a fluke.
In this demonstration experiment that Debbie did,
the sitter estimated that she was 93% accurate,
and then after while they were interviewing me,
and she and the sitter had a chance to privately
compare notes it turned out that some of the information
that the sitter didn't understand on later reflection
turned out to fit her grandmother precisely
and she went up to 80, 97 or 98%.
Sometimes mediums are
close to perfect.
It's quite remarkable.
Tell me then what is the difference between
for example, if they're reading,
say it's your grandmother,
and you have these common experiences,
and you have heard basically in your memory,
your love, your heart, your aura, etcetera,
and the experiences you've had together,
what is the difference between being able to
go into your aura and pluck this
information out versus
what you're talking about?
If the medium was going into my aura and plucking
the information out, what she'd be doing
is first of all giving me the information that's
most prominent in my mind.
She would be feeding back
what I'm looking for, the answers that I'm searching for,
and 95% of the time what the mediums
give you is not what you're thinking.
95% of the time you're screaming,
for example, there was a car crash!
There was a car crash, and
she's not getting car crash.
She's somewhere else, or she's
giving you other details,
or she's saying well I'm seeing a lot of blood,
and you're thinking car crash.
You're seeing car crash.
She doesn't see it.
The first thing is is that what is being
received is not what you're thinking.
Secondly, very often, the information that's received
is information you're not even aware of.
You don't know until after you've left a reading
and you checked with your sister or your mother or whomever,
you discover that the information was correct,
but you wouldn't have that information.
Not only is she not giving you what you're
wanting to hear or expecting to hear,
but she's giving you information
that you don't know.
You therefore have to hypothesize, well if she's somehow
still reading people's minds or auras, she's somehow
managing to ignore yours
and find some other person whose not there
to get this information from.
Of course that's still in principle possible,
it's just not terribly probable.
The third thing is is that
the information often acts like it's alive
particularly if the sitter can ask questions
of the medium.
I'll never forget when this was
really taught to me by a particular
deceased person with a particular medium
where I would ask a question of the medium
about a particular event
or a particular piece of information
I'm searching for, and while I'm asking
the question
she interrupts me with information
from the deceased, which I'm not thinking about
at all, which I don't even know that I wanna hear,
and this information turns out to be highly evidential.
What the deceased is doing is
asserting himself or herself into the process.
It's very much like normal communication,
and just like we could interrupt each other,
they interrupt us,
and there are multiple ways in which
the deceased act in ways which
they look like and act like they're alive.
At some point if it walks like a duck,
sounds like a duck, and it smells like duck and so on
and at some point you say well it's probably a duck,
and that's how this, that's why you end up
being led to the conclusion that the most plausible
explanation really is survival of consciousness.
Have you gotten any specific information
via Dr. Mack or any of the others that you're speaking
to through mediums about the nature of transition.
We've also interviewed Danun Brinkley,
and he talks at length about
what it's like to transition and come back
in his case on multiple occasions.
Right.
Have you gotten information from those
who have completely transitioned?
Up to now, our research has mostly focused on
the question,
is there an afterlife?
We've not scientifically allowed ourselves
to ask the question, what is the afterlife like
including the process of transition.
There are all kinds of anecdotal if you would,
uncontrolled pieces of information that comes through,
but nothing that we've done systematically.
We've just started within the past year
doing what we're calling the asking questions
experiment where we're now addressing this scientifically,
and this is the way we do it.
We have multiple mediums
read sitters blindly, because they don't know
who the sitter is, and
after the, and they're given a name like Robert.
There are millions of deceased Roberts.
That doesn't help you a lot, but at least
you know it's a male and it has that name,
and then what we do is we ask the medium
a series of life questions.
What does Robert look like?
What were Robert's hobbies?
How did Robert die?
What's Robert's favorite food?
So on and so forth.
Information that the sitter can verify
as fitting Robert.
Let's say that a given medium contacts Robert,
and she gets accurate information,
which as you know you could probably guess
is more often the case than not.
Then what we do is we ask a series of afterlife questions
such as what was your transition like?
What are you doing now?
Do you experience time?
Do you sleep?
What do you do on a typical day,
so on and so forth,
a series of 38 afterlife questions,
and what we do is we ask these 38 questions
of different mediums for a given deceased person,
and to the extent that the medium
is getting accurate information
about the life questions,
and she's giving replicated information
about things that uniquely fits a given deceased
person in the afterlife.
We can then have some
reason to conclude that what the medium is getting
and giving us is not her biases
or beliefs about the afterlife,
but what she's actually receiving from the deceased.
That work is now ongoing,
and we're just in the process.
Any early hits?
Well there are certain things that sort of come through.
One of the things is that
the universal, the deceased report
that travels a piece of cake.
That distance is not a problem.
Travel can be just a thought away.
The second thing is that it appears
that it's much easier to multi task
on the other side.
For example, I could be here in this interview right now
but I can simultaneously be remembering
my recent trip to Talas which was last
week and to Santa Fe, and so I can see myself
for example, walking into Talas,
having a meeting at the state department and so on.
I can't do both of those at the same time,
even though I can be thinking about
and imaging both of these things at the same time.
Apparently when you're deceased
you can.
You can be in Talas and be in Tucson
at the same time and parallel process in a way
that is more effective.
Apparently there are a number of pluses to shedding
one's physical body.
Anything else on that line
you'd like to share?
That's a cheesy little grin.
I sometimes refer to these people as post physical.
The post physical.
We're the physicals.
They're the post physicals.
Dr. Julie Barshell was as post doctoral fellow
whom collaborates with me on this research.
She sometimes refers to the deceased
as the physically challenged,
and very often with the deceased who are actively
collaborating on research, including what we call
the double deceased paradigm.
We refer to them when we put on our scientific jargon.
We refer to them as departed hypothesized co-investigators.
Sounds credible.
It does have a ring of credibility to it.
With all of this, what do they say about you
at Yale these days and at your home university?
Are you still thought to be a little far out
and cooky or are you getting some validation now?
It's interesting there are sort of three camps.
There are one group of faculty who
think the work is fantastic.
They think it's revolutionary.
They think it's
very critical
for the evolution of the species.
They encourage me to go forward as long
as we do so with utmost care,
and caution and so on.
There's a second group of people who
don't like to talk about it in public,
but behind closed doors they will say
to me things like I'm really glad you're
doing this work.
I wouldn't be interested in doing this.
I wouldn't be brave enough to do this,
but I'm glad you're doing it,
and we hope it comes out positive,
and then there's a third group,
and these people think that you've gotta be
crazy to do this research.
It's impossible that survival of the conscious can be true,
that the mediums are somehow fooling me,
that the wool is being pulled over my eyes
Mr. James Randy sometimes refers
to me as gullible Gary.
The famous Randy.
The famous Randy, the amazing Randy, exactly.
And they feel that you have to be either
crazy or diluted or cheating yourself
to be getting these kinds of results,
and so all three
opinions are present.
What I do is I
live with the totality of people's opinions.
People ask me, they say Gary are you trying
to prove survival of consciousness?
I say absolutely not.
What I'm trying to do is to live survival of consciousness
the opportunity to prove itself.
The motto of our lab is if it's real
it will be revealed,
and if it's fake we'll find a mistake.
Although the skeptical colleagues
don't really understand this about me.
I'm really concerned with truth,
with veritas.
In fact our research program is titled
the veritas research program,
and our website is veritas.arizona.edu,
and veritas is Latin.
It's Harvard's motto which means truth,
and Yale's motto is luxa veritas which
is light and truth.
We're just following where the data are,
and if it turns out that there
was time used to think
the earth was flat and then we discovered it was round.
People thought you were crazy,
Columbus was crazy to make the trip,
or we used to think the sun revolved around the earth.
Now we know it's the other way around,
and Copernicus was laughed at as with Gallelio
or we used to think objects were solid.
Now we know they're mostly empty space and so on.
The history of science over and over tells us there
are moments where this paradigm changes.
There are moments when we
really have to change our minds about the
way we view the world.
If that's part of the history of
science and if it comes with the territory,
you know, endure it the best you can.
If you want to take a look at the subject
of life beyond life from an entirely different angle,
you'll likely enjoy our interviews with
Danon Brinkley who died for 28
minutes and tells about the journey to the other side,
and our interview with Dr. Mitchell Gibson,
a psychiatrist who has seen and communicated
with those who have passed over.
Until next time, thanks for watching.
(calm music)